that speed at which that light and that
dark travels to my eye is so fast except
for Muhammad Ali he's said I'm so fast I
could turn out the lights and be in bed
before it's
dark I came of age I'm a little older
than you I came of age than when
people I have to adjust what what he
just told you here like a
chiropractor was that is that Lion
King we get him
it is almost never possible no can I ask
a question no uh
[Music]
so this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
you're a personal astrophysicist I got
with me as co-host today Paul mcyo Paul
welcome back oh thanks thanks for having
me great to be back with you bud yeah
this is the
attorney stock broker turned comedian
yes jorney Investment Bank return commun
there's nothing funny about yeah exactly
lawyers and stock Brokers no exactly I
found a way to like run from it as fast
as I all right so Paul we're going to do
grab bag Cosmic queries we are we got
some great queries here and I don't
trust myself in grab bag mode oh yeah I
need backup yes you did I got to get go
for the Big D you need your stari
you're Scot yeah 70 to to to get that
reference he did pull up and aord
ARA Charles Lou welcome back to Star
Talk hi Neil it's great to be back
Charles long time friend our familyes a
friends and colleagues you were here
when we built the new rose Center for
Earth in space 25 years ago has it been
that long it's been a quarter Century
geez it feels like yesterday that I came
over here and this place was a hole in
the ground yeah it does feel that way
and it was you have intellectual and
Sweat Equity and what we built here so
we're thankful for that ah it was fun
and that's weird cuz when we were
talking he wasn't here you said he
didn't do
much you took a lot of the credit I
don't know well you know he's not
wrong I was just hanging out here all
night having a great time yeah yeah
that's all it was just jump right in
okay all right let's do it this is
Galaxy uh Hey Dr Tyson Dr Lou I galaxy
is the person uh yeah galaxy galaxy okay
that's there uh I am Brian from
Roseville California I just recently
joined the patreon and I'm excited have
my question answered welcome yes thank
say it right welcome to the
universe okay we dim the lights when you
hear
that I have always wondered how Giant
Gas clouds and nebula exist in space
shouldn't the vacuum cause all gas to
disperse evenly to the point of not
being even even being able to see it I
love that because on Earth any cloud of
gas disperses that's right as as dogs
know that's right dogs will smell you
from far away because whatever is your
stank one minute in and he say the guest
has
stank uh this is a lesson anybody
watching on how not to host the show at
least it's not smell a
vision gracious yeah so it does it
dissipate and you look at blood in the
water and that that does it dissipate
evenly that well there it's a diffusion
equation where you have molecules it
wouldn't happen in solid cuz all the
molecules are just rigid but in a in a
fluid they can vibrate no but you're not
going to move it through the the system
no there's a phase there's a phase issue
I'm saying it's not going to move
through the system just trying to get
technical okay and wow this is getting
tense already well he called me skank I
mean what am I supposed to do I didn't
say skank I stank stank let's do our own
show okay out
here so so the diffusion equate so you
have a molecule that can move like all
the others and it just works its way
through yeah in my high school we had
there was a diffusion experiment where
they there a long tube it's one of these
display because we didn't have any
athletic trophies to put geeky so you
got put other stuff in your hallway
display cases it's a hall of beakers is
that yeah one of them is a very tall
Beaker yes about this tall if I remember
correctly that was little not much
little I think it was this big and there
was ink at the bottom and they carefully
put water on top of it y mhm and
throughout the year you got to watch cuz
the ink is slightly denser but still
they're both fluids and so you get to
watch the ink work its way up real
slowly yeah in at my high school they
had diffusion experiments every
afternoon after the school lunches were
served bean soup oh and in every
classroom
experiment of different particles
suspended in the atmosphere moving from
one side of the classroom to the other
after you first heard that something
people didn't figure out to not eat the
bean soup exactly and that's where you
got your name skank stank stank stank
stank so did you um but would could you
do that same with the ink could you do
it with oil like cooking oil or well
it's harder no cuz oil would float and
the misil between oil and water is very
different between because ink is has is
most inks that we used are water-based
anyway so the water is finding the water
molecules yeah so so Brian your the
answer is basically the conditions out
in space make it so that these gas
particles tend to disperse unless they
have a reason to collect okay here on
Earth you have different kinds of things
like buoyancy involved and things like
that that also happens in space but in
space when the temperatures are very low
say
400 below z f gravity can actually
overcome a lot of the emotional sort of
dispersive diffusive emotional emotional
emotional yes it could be emotional you
know I ain't doing
it it's very moving that's right you
tear up you start crying a lot emotional
I never heard that word to become a star
oh my gosh yeah yeah some become Stars
yeah when it's called the random of the
gases are actually overcome by the
mutual gravity that they exert on each
other does it happen is it dispersing in
an in an even nature everything is
turbulent if you go see for example
beautiful pictures of say the Orion
Nebula or other interstellar clouds you
see that they're streaky and strange and
unusual shape they they look like HSE
heads they look like helixes and Cat's
eyes and things like that um and that's
completely because the turbulence is
still going ontic
both we got to ask these stars that are
emitting their planetary nebula what are
they smoking you know I think that would
be a very very good idea but the bottom
line is that in space you have gravity
holding these clouds together long
enough for them to do things like form
stars and planets but there's always
these forces and these different
energies and so forth for trying to
disperse them and so you get beautiful
combinations and that's why you get
beautiful nebula and you get things like
stars and planets I will add that you
have a gas cloud that makes a family of
stars so that eats up most of the mass
of the gas cloud but there's part of the
gas that didn't participate in the
formation of the planet snoody like you
were in high school little
standoffish it just wasn't was and that
gas doesn't always land on a star do we
know why in all serious well now now the
gas doesn't have enough gravity to make
it a Next Star we're done no but at the
time and I'm not trying to be too far
away that gas like all the other gases
had an equal opportunity part of that
it's not an equal opportunity system if
you're a little too far away you not you
might not feel the strong enough gravity
to participate and the stars form
without you and then this and I like
that hand gesture because I'll follow up
on it the whole galaxy is is rotating
okay so your whole system with your
stars and your gas is moving and there's
B other stuff so your gas can get
stripped and Scatter into the Galaxy
never to make another star so that gas
just continues gas throughout the
Universe and this is these are the
particles that comprise the interstellar
medium even between the gas cloud it's
not completely empty okay yeah and can
that gas marry with other gases
eventually and sort of possibly be part
of another it depends completely on like
what what Neil was saying what is the
rotational Shear what is the temperature
the environment how much of it just
happens to gather at this moment whether
it can actually collect or not collect
um it's really beautiful and fasinating
dynamic but the funny thing is it is
very very sparse right here on Earth we
have trillions upon trillions of
particles of gas even in the tiniest you
know Beaker or vial but out in space
just even a couple hundred miles above
Earth's surface we're lucky if we even
get one gas particle it be the best
vacuum ever created on Earth is what
just space so people who study
interstellar clouds are literally
studying nothing yeah and yet that's the
nothing from which we come from right so
it's endlessly fascinating such is the
layout of this Cosmic
ballet well said choreographed by the
forces of gravity it's more like a
Martha Graham kind of ballet makes it
too orderly I I'm feeling Alvin ay okay
Alin oh yeah we go we go Alvin I've
beened wins every time all right we're
moving on uh great question great
answers Christopher win hello Dr Tyson
Dr Lou I am Chris win from Ottawa
Ontario Canada I'm new to preaching love
your show my question is during the Big
Bang what went bang if we don't know
what are your best guesses there's only
one answer here it's the universe went
bang right okay next
question I can take well we know the
idea we know we know the idea of
personal space was blown this right look
the term Big Bang was actually coined uh
by orri so misleading because it's about
expansion not about bang it's a tributed
why don't you guys fix that I've tried
I've Tri we we there's a lot of Legacy
language that that permeates our field
and it's makes it historically
interesting can I ask a question this
so in all seriousness how would that
process work within the scientific
Community if you wanted to sort of take
on the task of
changing you mean like if you change uh
don't even stop stop it I'll kick you
out of this office and throw you off the
roof say I'm already stank so I mean why
not right think about stank wait no no
go Ahad two very important points here
so finish your big bang story okay the
Big Bang term is attributed to a guy
named Fred hoil uh it was an interview
done early on in the middle of the 20th
century uh and back when ideas for the
beginning of the universe were still
uncertain and they were still contesting
right and so he himself did not like the
idea that the Universe started from
nothing or something very small and
became something big and so uh the
journalist that he was speaking with or
interviewer whatever saids something
like so you're think in the universe is
kind of like a like a big bang of some
kind and that just stuck did he do it to
make science in all Ser sexy like sort
of to get people today no one really
knows um I've seen it historically
expressed as it was derisive or that it
was spectacular one or the other but yes
the right answer is it's an expansion of
space and time from something small to
something big it was not an explosion
and now we have this problem where we
think oh if the Big Bang is an explosion
what did it explode into you know things
like that well key part of that where it
explode from yeah there's a lot of other
and then there's this thing called This
is Cosmic inflation right which which
happened in the first tiny fraction of a
second which is an expansion within an
expansion you know imagine if you're
blowing up a balloon slowly and then
suddenly someone slaps you on the back
and your air all goes out at once you
know and it blows up and we call that
inflation which gets mixed in with all
kinds of the Jimmy Carter error
hyperinflation that existed at the just
before nixonian times are you sure but
there is a sure but in it was
like when this happened okay this this
Cosmic inflation there is a theory that
a gas cloud formed the initials win
which is whip inflation now
Jimmy Carter come on that was good that
was see how I brought that back it's
historical though yeah right everything
is hisor quick just while we're on the
how does it relate back to yeah
Society uh I came of age I'm a little
older than you I came of age you're lot
older than when
people uh I think I heard him whisper
you're old as
dirt and I didn't think it was a very
scientific term but that's what he used
I think I'm 20% older than Charles here
plus or minus so he uh I came of age
when we applied computing power yes to
what galaxies would do to each other
when they encountered classic paper by
two brothers arar and Yuri tumr in 1972
tumay And tumr yes terrific paper what
kind of data are you inputting into the
so so you we saw these weird looking
galaxies out there this is just an an
analog so I don't to spend too much time
on it really weird looking galaxies and
there was someone in our field who
compiled them into one catalog chip ARP
called the atlas of peculiar Galaxy yeah
these are galy are just weird they don't
match any form so I don't know why but
here they are and everyone saying what
what could make these galaxies are they
are they born that way and then Gerard
deur who's a Galaxy Jerry I call him
Jerry yeah we're like this he he was
very French he very he was pretty sure
that a crashed Lexus is not a different
kind of car it's still a Lexus okay so
he that was Toyota
actually so he becomes a Toyota good one
good one so the idea that no they're not
peculiar they changed because they had
these encounters these collisions these
galaxies colliding and they're colliding
all the time right okay now I forgot why
I I was even going to mention not
inflation oh yeah yeah so at the time at
the time time this is now in the 80s
okay these are your people now in the
80s we we call this no no you'll
understand why in 10 seconds come on so
we called it in our field mergers and
Acquisitions oh my God we did are you
serious I have no idea Galaxy mergers
and Acquisitions oh my God so hot then
it was so hot right out of Wall Street
so we have inflation and mergers and
Acquisitions and and now look where we
are that's right we're with doctor thank
and um hey Star Talk fans I don't know
if you know this but the audio version
of the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify an apple podcast and
most other podcast Outlets that are out
there multiple ways to ingest all that
is Cosmic on Star Talk The Big Bang
within the bang big bang at the tiny
fraction of that moment when it happened
Y is there still yet an explanation as
to why that had happened there are
numerous competing hypotheses but we
don't have the experimental evidence to
show the initial burst or the thing that
caused it to happen we're pretty sure it
did happen we got Clos to that energy
the bigger part is our particle
accelerator the earlier in time it
can it can see Bas not see but uh
represent right in the temperature
density and the particle accelerator you
can say in the first microc or the first
nanc of the universe what was the
temperature oh my gosh it was this High
have we ever reached that temperature in
the lab no not yet the day we do we get
to say we think we have sampled what the
early Universe would have looked like do
new particles pop in is there a dark
matter particle that shows up we don't
know but do you both understand there
brilliant scientists that lay people
like myself are looking for in all
series of solid answers right like I'm
still trying to figure myself out hang
on a second fig myself out through
counseling therapy whatever the universe
hasn't been able to figure yourself out
in 13.8 billion years can you guys get
on the stick and give us an answer I
would like to I would like to but this
is the you you hit the key point in the
difference between yes you hit the key
point between what I think is the
difference between scientific truth and
non-scientific truth with scientific
truth we always put in the but we wrong
part that we don't know for absolute
sure part and that's really really
important right science could not have
progressed if somebody said this is the
right answer and then everyone just oh
okay okay people would have
stopped it's incredibly important to
recognize that we have ignorance uh Neil
has a terrific term for this uh the
perimeter of ignorance we have to
understand that there's a space beyond
which we don't know the answer yet or
even what we think we know could be
wrong because of this this this this and
this which is why Paul you need to love
the questions themselves oh in your
search for to profound Dude too profound
no that's that's Rainer Maria Ry in a
poem ah yes plus I have to I have to
adjust what what he just told you here
okay like a
chiropractor he's gonna he's gonna just
wrong word I need a different going to
straighten your he's going to straighten
your mental back
out CRA your mental
yeah so um I put a lot of thought and
energy into defining what true means and
I've settled in a way that I think is
highly defensible and should be adopted
okay okay so scientific truth is that
which has been established by repeated
observations and
measurements when that happens it is not
later shown to be false so we can talk
about it as an objective truth equals
mc^ s is not one day going to be found
to be false that earth goes around the
Sun that the sun is hot that the sun
undergos thermonuclear Fusion is not
going to one day be found to be false
where Charles is referring to we have to
have some acceptance that we could be
wrong yes about things that we are not
definitively correct on the frontier
we're wrong most of the time but there
are some 90% are some
things at least the community is
comfortable saying you're saying that
there are some things equals MC squ Etc
where we're not questioning that anymore
there huge things huge swaps otherwise
you can't do otherwise we're not flying
airplanes otherwise you can't do the
exploration into the things airplanes
wouldn't fly Rockets don't go to Mars
and exactly where could continue to
research that there's another rationale
but I think what you're saying is no no
no hold on let me finish I'm almost done
okay it doesn't mean that we will not
one day find a deeper truth in which the
experimentally verified truths are
embedded such was the case with Newton's
laws of gravity and motion those laws in
the Realms in which they were tested are
still valid we went to the moon using
Newton's laws and not Einstein okay
there was no relativity in the Apollo
voyages it was all Newton's laws of
gravity and motion we then learned that
at high speed's high gravity Newton's
Laws break down holy do we discard
Newton what's going on well there's
gravitational weight so
Einstein finds a deeper understanding of
gravity and motion and he gets his
theory of theories of Relativity special
Theory and general relativity guess what
when you plug low speeds and low gravity
into Einstein's equations they become
Newton's equations people say oh we
Newton out Einstein in that
misrepresents what's actually happening
here they Co you can't have it's chicken
egg you can't have one without the other
well well no I mean in terms of the
pathways of Discovery you get the
restricted case before you discover the
general case my only point is the
uncertainty that a scientist brings to
the frontier is in the realm of things
that we have not yet experimentally
verified and it's it's completely
uncertain at that level and we're just
duking it out at conferences and the
like and the Press Eaves drops on the
conferences they the scientists don't
know what they're talking about and then
people say I don't trust science yeah as
they're on their smartphone talking to
someone a thousand miles away ience you
know so I just want to clarify that and
two other truths there's your personal
truth like is Jesus your savior is
Muhammad your last prophet is is Beyonce
your queen rather than Taylor Swift
right so that's a personal then you have
political truths which are things that
become true in your head simply because
they were repeated so often yes which
are the foundations of or because you
read it on Twitter yeah no how many
times you read it it's not it's how many
times and so is that any the foundations
of is that any different than commercial
advertising no exactly the same I'm
going you're going to show you this toy
Toyota 50 times and by the end of the
week you're going to be like I got to
get a Toyota that's a great and no
matter what they're telling you that
becomes true right so those are the
three truths right uh and I will never
speak of of an absolute truth because
that's not what science does Newton's
gravity was proven to be wrong is true
it's was wrong because in certain
conditions in the universe it was not
correct but that that's but those are
extreme conditions well beyond the
experimental realm that expands our it's
a good thing when a bad thing happened
like that it's a good thing because it
expands our base of don't call it bad we
don't invest emotions in it some people
do but it's not good if you do right
well I talk like a six-year-old no so do
I well this is is perfect because this
next question is about gravitational
waves I'm telling this is eie okay this
is Mitchell Ransom uh Mitch from the UK
I would love to know more about what we
can learn from gravitational waves it's
cool we can detect them but what can
that do for our understanding of the
universe marvelous question perfect
perfect marvelous question you take this
off back clean up on it okay
go I will be
the and then I'll be the guy who
shouldn't steal second doesn't gets
thrown out and ruins the
inning well if Otani were stealing he'd
actually make it oh my God yeah or if
you're going to steal second do it deep
into the count of a battery you want to
see come up again the next inning also
the that's true right because they get
fresh right and also fundamental
baseball which doesn't get talked about
nearly as much as it we should do a
whole thing on baseball oh my God oh my
gosh the Bigg I mean I think I think the
pitch clock while it's helped Speed the
game up I mean stealing is so much more
interesting and fun to watch because you
go over there twice you know you're
going to get you you you can't go back
at the time that's right they're very
interesting rules are always fun too
talking about rules the most interesting
sport to watch I think baseball because
of all of the machinations but anyway
yeah okay well here's the deal
gravitational waves are essentially uh
to the universe and space and time as
say ripples are in a pond right so if
you see ripples going on in a pond or
any body of water you can deduce things
about that pond what is the water made
out of is there duckweed on the top how
deep is it uh is there ice you know
things like that all the different
things about that puddle by the way the
depth is affects the the amplitude of
the Ripple completely so it's why when
you're at the beach how come you know
you see a swell sort of out there but
then it gets closer to the shore it
becomes a big wave yeah so the energy
that is out there in the ocean which is
shared vertically to the bottom of the
thing as you get shallower and shallower
that energy has to manifest somehow and
the height of the wave grows and so the
energy is the same but the height and
how you experience it as a beachgoer but
where does wind come into this if I'm so
because wind can create a have to just
that's right the top has an effect the
bottom has an effect and the side has an
effect right where where is it coming
from bouncing off the edges make a
difference if you're in a bay or if
you're just hitting a wide Shoreline
also what is the material of the beach
is it Rocky is it Sandy so gravitational
waves literally have the opportunity if
we're sensitive enough to detect them to
tell us about SpaceTime the structure of
the universe the things that these
ripples go through got to add real quick
Charles is talking about things you
would know Beyond just the simple
detection of the wave that's right it's
one thing to know that there's a wave
there now what's the amplitude what's
the wavelength how many of these are
there are they coming from this
direction there there's different layers
but the Nobel Prize went to basically
the first time it was ever discovered
and then you then you can keep asking
more detailed questions when your
telescopes become better to do so that's
right but this gets to Newton's law of
universal gravitation right which does
not provide for the existence of
gravitation waves it asserts that
gravity has instantaneous effect which
is wrong because I dropped a 1982 bottle
of sh chat the feat Rothchild and I in
it fell seriously in slow motion did you
seriously do that it landed on a pillow
I'm
sure and it fell in slow motion
everything slowed down so he's Newton's
wrong I'm right no but so now so that's
where Newton and Einstein right are S no
wait wait just to be clear Newton did
not have a strong investment in any
expectation that things happen
instantaneously his big concern was that
it was action at a distance and there
was nothing in between that was just a
little weird he knew it worked but he
couldn't explain it in any way but it's
he was not deeply invested an example
that for that for me so there's
something in the distance but nothing in
between let's say I turn off that light
okay over there it actually takes a
fraction of a second for that light
Mater for that information to get to me
that the light is no longer shining
right
except for Muhammad Ali who you know
what he said he said I'm so fast I could
turn out the lights and be in bed before
it's
dark he he also floated like a butterfly
and stung like a bee that guy was pretty
amazing yeah so um that speed at which
that light and that dark travels to my
eye is so fast that I as a human being
could never detect it but if I had a
very sensitive camera that could really
stop down time to billionths of a second
or trillions of a second at a time you
can actually see it getting darker as it
moves forward oh to your right light use
moves one foot per nanc per billionth of
second so you just need billions and you
can catch yeah catch yeah so from the
side if you look at it from the side you
would you would literally see it there's
a right now there's a straight white
line of light and then you'd see it
getting darker darker well there there's
also background light right remember our
light is is primarily Illuminating from
you have a laser and put chalk dust in
there and you see through and then you
do this that would work that would be a
great way to do that absolutely people
don't know what chalk dust
is go to a baseball game there you go oh
yeah yeah for the thing so so Newton
really didn't get the sense or
understand that there was a time lag
right Einstein which is what gravit
gravitational waves is all about right
right um they move at Einstein showed
that information in the universe
especially carried by light right and
waves has a speed limit and then folks
Wonder it's not just a good idea it's
the
law had to say it's a great
commercial D dad joke is going on in
your brain it's a dad joke dad I love
the dad jeness of that it's really very
good so so what happened is that
Einstein showed that there was this uh
reasonable
um sort of speed limit to the universe
the speed at which light travels in the
vacuum and then folks said well you know
what if that's the speed limit of light
maybe that's also the speed limit of
these things these other things any
information at all you know and so like
gravity yeah so maybe gravity only
travels at the speed of light and that's
important to know when we see
gravitational waves we infer the
existence of little tiny particles
called gravitons that travel through
space in order to have this wave happen
we still have never detected the
existence of gravitons in the laboratory
we may never be able to unless we can
get a particle accelerator the size of
the solar system but what we can do is
to say well this proves that speed of
light and speed of gravitational waves
and so forth are so close to one another
that there's a there must be something
there so that in itself I guess is
another Discovery right by gravitational
waves existing you start putting strict
upper limits on the mass of a graviton
just to be clear before we knew anything
about photons of light light was
described as waves and then we learn
that the wave particle you know do it
can be it can manifest as a particle the
photon or as that you can detect or as
waves which you can also detect as Waves
by analogy to
that gravitational
waves are granted a particle counterpart
gra the graviton which is it's which is
a counterpart in a way phot correct and
you need different mechanisms to detect
it in that mode when we say particles
Collide to create virtual particles do
they really fist bump each other down at
the plank scale occupying the same voxel
at the same time or do they just get
close enough and then you know magic
happens great question they get close
enough as an undergraduate it I learned
some about a very technical silly term
called the impact
parameter and that means that if you
have two things coming toward each other
how close do they have to be before they
impact each other affect each other they
don't have to touch each other they
don't actually have to touch wait so
like if I did this to you right I'm not
touching you I'm not touching you he's
not touching me stop not touching me
wait I we let's go a layer deeper we did
a whole episode of Cosmos on this
because of electromagnetic forces which
hold your body together when I go up to
Charles and I touch him if you actually
analyze what's going on at the molecular
and atomic level I'm not actually
touching him there forces in a field
surrounding the particles and it's the
forces that are bumping off each other
and this impact parameter exists when
there are fields that surround the
objects that are coming near each other
I can see my finger my skin touching
that surface so so you're telling me
that I'm what I'm seeing at a very
microscopic scale there's something
between that plastic and my SK there is
space between that plastic and your skin
but what happens is that the uh Fields
transfer energy so your skin still feels
as if it is physically touching
something but that's something coming
from the bottle and the bottles coming
from the skin right so so there is a a
tiny bit of space in between and there
is stuff passing between it otherwise
your finger would just pass through the
plastic so there's a space like my my
emotional relationship with my wife
there's a sliver we don't want to get
into so so I Love This Love This what
Charles says because we don't hear that
term much but it's kind of it's almost
self-explanatory it's the
distance within which you can declare
there was an interaction between the two
object there's there way to there's a
way to measure that you can put it in
the mathematical equations and say okay
well I have some force field in my
finger you have some force field in that
plastic
container when they come together how
close do they have to be before I feel
the force of those container particles
pushing on my finger particles it's it's
more precise than that so you have two
I'm pulling this out of my 30-year
memory you you can ask okay
so so if two objects two gravitational
objects are come by and one just gets
pulled a little bit that's right you can
say all right what does that mean but
you can Define just for conversational
and mathematical purposes the impact
parameter is the distance within which
its trajectory will be altered by more
than 90 degrees it's pretty cool so
that's why when we talk about say
colliding galaxies the stars in the
galaxies actually never hit each other
almost never have direct Collision but
they go by each other and as they go by
it's like a swarm of angry bees and they
affect each other to the point where
there can be an explosion to the effect
where at times you will have an
explosion that's right so if I'm
touching this is there's a force that's
strong enough or can be measured at
which I can push those magnetic field or
those fields apart and I'm actually
touching it is it ever possible to
eliminate that feel that's between the
thing I'm my finger and the pen let's
say it is almost never possible because
at there is a limit no Beyond which the
math breaks down you see in the quantum
uh structure of the universe by way I
feel like I'm asking to use the car and
he's saying maybe and my dad's saying go
ahead
no back up for a minute keep it under 30
m an hour you'll be all right back Story
Time real quick okay I'll be reading
from Merlin you have some milk milk hot
coco get some hot coco Alex Merlin's
tour of the universe dear Merlin is
there a chance that another star will
One Day Collide with the
sun yes but you should know that if
there were just four snails randomly
carousing across the continental United
States snails don't carouse do they not
st's crew what are they
alcoholic drug Dr hey stale how's it
going drug ad likely for two of them to
accidentally bump into each other than
it is for another star and the sun
seriously to collide yeah yes and then
my then my artist brother drew two
snails colliding here one of which has a
bandana and a gun really weird a
carousing that's a carousing it's mostly
empty space so two galaxies colliding
the Stars just pass but they definitely
affect each other gravitation so this
this star this star is going by it's it
there's enough there is enough energy
there that it can cause each to explode
not necessarily they'll cause each other
to change their trajectories but once
every 4 seconds or so in the whole
observable universe this is an estimate
made a few years ago there is actually a
direct Collision okay this is most
likely to happen in dense clusters of
stars very dense okay like globular
clusters the center of the cluster right
in the center of the star where say for
example in the space which is normally
say a few light years between me and us
and Alpha centor for example there could
be million stars in that space when the
over densities are million to one
compared to say our solar neighborhood
uh you can actually have stars hitting
one another and they could actually
explode but the chances of even a
collision causing an explosion are tiny
because stars are mostly made out of gas
so imagine like a star going through
another star you're basically just
having gas clouds smashing into gas
clouds and go through you need the core
there are molecules within each gas
cloud that could sort of collide but
then they don't cause a collision
because they're so small right there's
so low energy but if you get the core of
a star hit the core of a star then can
actually create a star happening and you
create collisions make that happen come
on at once every four seconds you guys
are doing crazy stuff
than gued I know you guys are doing
crazy stuff in the basement of this
place let's make that happen okay I have
more questions I want I don't want to
dulge any more to you uh I don't have
the clearance have you ever wanted one
of your questions on the universe
answered we all have questions about the
universe black holes to quazars quantum
entanglement wormholes there is no end
to the depths of cosmic curiosity well
the entry level of of patreon membership
with Star Talk gets you just that I
think it starts at $5 a month you have
access to the question line that reaches
our Cosmic query programming and not
only that we produce a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members so if you weren't the director
of the Hayden planetarium what do you
think you would be doing what okay but
this have to be another Universe it
wouldn't happen in this universe okay
I'd be I'd be a a songwriter for
Broadway musicals oo so that's the entry
level and the perks ascend from there uh
there's a level in fact where we send
you a an autographed copy of one of my
latest books uh right now it's Star
Messenger Cosmic perspectives on
civilization and it's signed with my
fancy fountain pen with purple ink so I
I invite you to just check the link
below and all of that money goes to our
ability to experiment with new ways of
bringing the universe down to earth so
thank you for those who have already
joined and we welcome others to
participate in this Grand Adventure of
what it is to bring the universe down to
earth as always keep looking up Paul
time for a couple more oh absolutely uh
very good question here this is from
Morton L lur jar uh uh this is I hope uh
Don't make me say it a second time uh
it's greetings from Norway ion okay
Morton oh sorry Morton lur jar
lurar I hope you can help clarify
something for me if our son is a third
generation star how is it that we can
observe earlier generation Stars when
looking back in time since we are made
up of the Stardust from those earlier
Stars wouldn't their light have already
passed answer is the following I uh am a
third generation from my grandfather but
I can still see my great grandfather if
he's still alive right uh the idea is
that the generation in which you are
created may have happened while those
earlier Generations ours are still alive
right so our son is about 4 and a half
billion years old but if a first
generation star that created it was for
billion years old and then the the the
star that was before it was a few
billion years old but then there's a
generation of stars that's 13 billion
years old we can still see them because
they've still lived they're livive still
but that first generation star is always
going to be mom's favorite the third
generation son you know you know you
leave the kid home alone let them smoke
cigarettes when 12 that third generation
you WIP the binky on the pants instead
of sterilizing by the third kid take the
kid to the track instead of taking him
to the zoo I'm sorry I'm really put com
out my personal stuff coming out here
man wait wait Charles I think you missed
the point there I did I think oh no I
think sorry sorry I knew that but I
didn't want to say it I think okay the
generation of stars that gave their
lives to create the elements out of
which we are made are not there anymore
you're not going to see your grandfather
if you were made out of the the Flesh of
your grandfather or or your
great-grandfather they're not going to
be there they're dead because they gave
their lives for you what's going on here
is there we as we look out in space we
look back in time and see the universe
not as it is but as it once was so we
can look far enough out into space to
see the first generation stars do their
thing and and beautiful we we can see
look 8 billion years ago 8 billion years
ago those are stars manufacturing the
elements and they're about to die to
make room for the second generation and
that light is only now just reaching us
but those elements continue to exist
like my great great grandfather's DNA
exists in me yes but he ain't around he
lives in you thank you is that Lon King
yes oh yeah good very
good I recognize the first part of that
not the second
part sorry can we get a
we need a here we go right
here okay okay no we're mixing we're
mixing two points I know there's two
different points two different one point
is Look Back Time and the other is the
age of things okay okay when the first
generation of stars formed no he said
when when likeon yes yes yes a whole
episode of Family Guy on pronouncing
yeah that was a good one yeah yeah it
that was a good one um when when you
have a generation of stars form you have
some stars that die quickly but then you
have a bunch of stars that live longer
so those that died quickly contributed
their information or their materials to
the Next Generation their elements the
element that they make meanwhile the
first generation still exists and then
that generation goes and then they form
another generation but those old star
from the first generation still exist
the stars that did not give their lives
for us happen to live for a trillion
years so yes at least so they're all
still around right in every Galaxy and
that's not even about Look Back Time so
but some of them gave their lives for us
that's right so the notion that we are
second or third
generation generally that only matters
because we have elements that earlier
Generations don't those elements isn't
it the third generation star the sun is
composed of heavier elements like iron o
so that because they're heavier they can
exist longer
or pass low mass stars live forever and
high mass stars die and first generation
high mass stars died for us so yeah so
the caveat is they died for our sins yes
the caveat is that if there
are well okay um do you realize there's
a logical fact in
Christianity that if you don't sin then
Jesus died for no reason well then i'
better get to going I better get to get
what you been doing that's right that's
right what are we
doing time are wasted what are we wasted
time here come on show's over everybody
we're going to go sin our asses
off just don't tell my wife um the the
first generation of stars like the very
very first generation of stars may have
only formed shortlived Stars this is
something that has been speculated we're
not 100% zero generation star the I'm
sorry only formed short generation
shorted Stars shorted right so it's
possible that the original the OG
generation of stars is all gone okay
okay but certainly we can look back
several generations and see that there
are stars from previous generations that
still existed going back to your sort of
analogy of the great grandfather it's
like it's as if if you can see those
stars from previous generations that
were it's like your great-grandfather's
still alive and you could go see him
somewhere even though it's yeah but he's
not the one who gave you your elements
if you can still see them they're not
giving you the elements if they aren't
in your own Galaxy we we have all all
generations of stars within our own
Galaxy and has nothing to do with Look
Back Time yeah but the element in that
star that I can see that's a previous
generation to the sun they'll have fewer
heavy elements than we do okay but it's
doesn't it share some of the same
elements that the sun shares
generationally it might yeah yes the sun
has all of it plus the next generation's
worth mixed into it okay yeah great
question great yeah good one okay manade
Shandy in North Wales who what yeah who
what's his name manade Shandy from North
Wales wow wow you learn your Welsh
that's amazing or Michael is his name
okay uh given the relationship between
speed and time and the relationship
between speed and mass is there also
there for a direct relationship between
time and mass in other words if time
Were Somehow to stop would everything
become infin infinitely massive and
would we be dragged by intense grav
gravitational forces back into
Singularity man W man well I love that
that's a drop the mic moment everybody
I'm the mic's on a mic some amazing
amazingly thoughtful people in Wales
that are asking questions Inc that's
incredible man so do you interpret that
the way I do he's saying we know from
relativity that as you go fast
time slows down and your your mass
increases so instead of having it happen
that way let's figure out a way to slow
down time Y and would that then have
associated with it it increase in
everybody's Mass that's right that's an
interesting a great question um I don't
think that can happen that's not how
time works uh because what we're doing
when we're measuring speed is how fast
you are going through space right uh
it's the
distance you travel through space
divided by the amount of time it took
you to get there is this question
suggesting you could be dragged
backwards in time somehow the suggestion
is that you slow time down right I think
that instead of going at 1 second per
second it becomes 0.9.8 point where
something becomes everything becomes
singular right and I don't think that
can work because the the physics of time
which is still mysterious at certain
fundamental levels suggest that you
can't really manipulate time that way
the way you manipulate space or the way
you manipulate your speed travel through
a good point and my favorite thought
about time is that we are prisoners of
the present forever transitioning
between our inaccessible past and our
unknowable future you just gave me a
headache I don't even know what you're
talking about you know I know you like
that but I prefer M you want you want to
mess with that no but I'm going to
provide an alternative from that
incredible deep doc
lofty Kung Fu Panda Kung Fu Panda from
Master ugu okay right the past is
history the future is a
mystery all we have today is a gift and
that is why it's called the present that
was from kungu Panda yes it was okay it
ain't over till it's
over Yogi that that has a Time aspect if
you think about it most profound don't
look down your nose at that that only
works in baseball
no if you think about it Super Bowl if
you're in the Super Bowl and one team is
down by1 points how about it's get LLY 3
minutes late don't you love it's getting
the game is over okay so it's not over
you still have to put the two-minute
warnings commercials
in right you got to sell some soap but
the full significance of that comment
can only exist in baseball where there
is no clock except now there is with the
pitcher I I think that's all the time we
had so Charles finished a book recently
I loved it the quantum something the
handy quantum physics answer book they
have the word handy and Quantum in the
same title that's
badass the goal is to help everyone
understand which we need like this basic
level basic explanations of complex
things you know Quantum feels scary it
feels unknown but actually we interact
with it every day and so think of it as
a handbook don't think of it as a
textbook okay yeah good yeah nice
reference gu and and and Paul where
where where can we find you next this
week my Broadway show directed by Frank
Oz the original Yoda and all of that and
the great director we are taking out a
national tour we're going to be in
Florida in Orlando Florida and in um
Fort Lauderdale at the brow Center for
the Performing Arts Dr Philips Center in
Orlando going to be in Rhode Island
these good places a real theater we got
a set designed by the set designer for
The Late Show and we have animation
because you you also Moonlight I work at
theay Show stepen Co show up the warm up
and do on I going to be making another
appearance I'm going to be making
another standup appearance on the show
after the first of Year too and so we
got a really so you don't only war with
the audience occasionally he'll bring
you on for the broadcast yeah yeah done
a bunch of appearances on the show or do
sketches and like few times not you came
and say hi to me I love yeah every time
yeah absolutely and he's like don't make
eye contact with me I'm like okay all
right and and we got really cool
animation in the set It's JJ settl who
did B buad and all the SNL TV pels we
created this it's a multimedia show with
said with this really cool um it's
really cool so yeah people go to
palmrio.com get tickets come out support
the show would be great we got it
permission to speak is the name of it
permission to speak it's been really
great to be on with you I've read some
of your work and it's really great but
never shook my hand he never shook my
hand come
on I love you buddy I love you all right
that's all the time we have this has
been a Star Talk Cosmic query's grab bag
that was definitely some bad grabbing
right
there all right until next time Neil
degrass Tyson bidding you all to keep
looking up
[Music]